In full disclosure of you all, I have had a large amount of notice in preparation for this message. And for many weeks I have prayed and worked on it. I was nearly completed in my preparation when I heard an anecdote that struck me with such force that I threw all my preparation away. The story was that of a newly ordained minister. He was assigned his first Sunday message and he wrote a letter to the bishop asking him what to talk about. The bishop replied “Preach about God, and preach about 20 minutes.” So to that end I will try to make this as brief as I can. This is a huge struggle, because faith is such a huge topic. What is faith, what does it mean to have faith, is faith all that is necessary for salvation and so on. Further complicating this is that this passage is from Hebrews, which in my view is the most confusing book in the New Testament. There is a reason you don’t see bumper stickers or t-shirts in fancy calligraphy that say “For the law appoints as high priests men who are weak; but the oath, which came after the law, appointed the Son, who has been made perfect forever.” (Heb 7:28) We almost need an entire message just to explain what is going on in the book of Hebrews. So I think my plan for today is to first give a very brief explanation of the book of Hebrews, and then to set the verses we read today in the context of that book. Then secondly we will look at what faith is, and finally what makes Abraham and exemplar of faith.
	The reason that the book of Hebrews is so hard to understand is that it wasn’t written to 21st century Americans, I suppose in some sense it is but not in the exact sense. The book of Hebrews was written to Hebrews, which is another name for the people descended through Eber who is mentioned almost as a footnote in Genesis 10. One of those descended from Eber was a man named Abram, who would later be known as Abraham. Abraham came to be the father of many nations including the Jews. So the Christians to whom this book was written were descended from Abraham. Now instead of trying to summarize the whole Old Testament, I just ask everyone to read through Steven’s speech to the Sanhedrin in Acts 7:
  “Brothers and fathers, listen to me! The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham while he was still in Mesopotamia, before he lived in Harran. 3 ‘Leave your country and your people,’ God said, ‘and go to the land I will show you.’[a]
4 “So he left the land of the Chaldeans and settled in Harran. After the death of his father, God sent him to this land where you are now living.5 He gave him no inheritance here, not even enough ground to set his foot on. But God promised him that he and his descendants after him would possess the land, even though at that time Abraham had no child. 6 God spoke to him in this way: ‘For four hundred years your descendants will be strangers in a country not their own, and they will be enslaved and mistreated. 7 But I will punish the nation they serve as slaves,’ God said, ‘and afterward they will come out of that country and worship me in this place.’[b] 8 Then he gave Abraham the covenant of circumcision. And Abraham became the father of Isaac and circumcised him eight days after his birth. Later Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs.
9 “Because the patriarchs were jealous of Joseph, they sold him as a slave into Egypt. But God was with him 10 and rescued him from all his troubles. He gave Joseph wisdom and enabled him to gain the goodwill of Pharaoh king of Egypt. So Pharaoh made him ruler over Egypt and all his palace.
11 “Then a famine struck all Egypt and Canaan, bringing great suffering, and our ancestors could not find food. 12 When Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent our forefathers on their first visit. 13 On their second visit, Joseph told his brothers who he was, and Pharaoh learned about Joseph’s family. 14 After this, Joseph sent for his father Jacob and his whole family, seventy-five in all. 15 Then Jacob went down to Egypt, where he and our ancestors died. 16 Their bodies were brought back to Shechem and placed in the tomb that Abraham had bought from the sons of Hamor at Shechem for a certain sum of money.
17 “As the time drew near for God to fulfill his promise to Abraham, the number of our people in Egypt had greatly increased. 18 Then ‘a new king, to whom Joseph meant nothing, came to power in Egypt.’[c] 19 He dealt treacherously with our people and oppressed our ancestors by forcing them to throw out their newborn babies so that they would die.
20 “At that time Moses was born, and he was no ordinary child.[d] For three months he was cared for by his family. 21 When he was placed outside, Pharaoh’s daughter took him and brought him up as her own son. 22 Moses was educated in all the wisdom of the Egyptians and was powerful in speech and action.
23 “When Moses was forty years old, he decided to visit his own people, the Israelites. 24 He saw one of them being mistreated by an Egyptian, so he went to his defense and avenged him by killing the Egyptian. 25 Moses thought that his own people would realize that God was using him to rescue them, but they did not. 26 The next day Moses came upon two Israelites who were fighting. He tried to reconcile them by saying, ‘Men, you are brothers; why do you want to hurt each other?’
27 “But the man who was mistreating the other pushed Moses aside and said, ‘Who made you ruler and judge over us? 28 Are you thinking of killing me as you killed the Egyptian yesterday?’[e] 29 When Moses heard this, he fled to Midian, where he settled as a foreigner and had two sons.
30 “After forty years had passed, an angel appeared to Moses in the flames of a burning bush in the desert near Mount Sinai. 31 When he saw this, he was amazed at the sight. As he went over to get a closer look, he heard the Lord say: 32 ‘I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.’[f] Moses trembled with fear and did not dare to look.
33 “Then the Lord said to him, ‘Take off your sandals, for the place where you are standing is holy ground. 34 I have indeed seen the oppression of my people in Egypt. I have heard their groaning and have come down to set them free. Now come, I will send you back to Egypt.’[g]
35 “This is the same Moses they had rejected with the words, ‘Who made you ruler and judge?’ He was sent to be their ruler and deliverer by God himself, through the angel who appeared to him in the bush. 36 He led them out of Egypt and performed wonders and signs in Egypt, at the Red Sea and for forty years in the wilderness.
37 “This is the Moses who told the Israelites, ‘God will raise up for you a prophet like me from your own people.’[h] 38 He was in the assembly in the wilderness, with the angel who spoke to him on Mount Sinai, and with our ancestors; and he received living words to pass on to us.
39 “But our ancestors refused to obey him. Instead, they rejected him and in their hearts turned back to Egypt. 40 They told Aaron, ‘Make us gods who will go before us. As for this fellow Moses who led us out of Egypt—we don’t know what has happened to him!’[i] 41 That was the time they made an idol in the form of a calf. They brought sacrifices to it and reveled in what their own hands had made. 42 But God turned away from them and gave them over to the worship of the sun, moon and stars. This agrees with what is written in the book of the prophets:
“‘Did you bring me sacrifices and offerings
    forty years in the wilderness, people of Israel?
43 You have taken up the tabernacle of Molek
    and the star of your god Rephan,
    the idols you made to worship.
Therefore I will send you into exile’[j] beyond Babylon.
44 “Our ancestors had the tabernacle of the covenant law with them in the wilderness. It had been made as God directed Moses, according to the pattern he had seen. 45 After receiving the tabernacle, our ancestors under Joshua brought it with them when they took the land from the nations God drove out before them. It remained in the land until the time of David,46 who enjoyed God’s favor and asked that he might provide a dwelling place for the God of Jacob.[k] 47 But it was Solomon who built a house for him.
…
51 “You stiff-necked people! Your hearts and ears are still uncircumcised. You are just like your ancestors: You always resist the Holy Spirit! 52 Was there ever a prophet your ancestors did not persecute? They even killed those who predicted the coming of the Righteous One. And now you have betrayed and murdered him— 53 you who have received the law that was given through angels but have not obeyed it.”
The book of Hebrews was written to a group of Christians who were confused. They were confused about who Jesus was in light of the promises given to their ancestors by God. What is all this about Jesus, the Righteous one, as Stephan called him? I can almost hear it now “Sure, I affirm that Jesus is my Lord, but see we already got this other thing going on with the promises made to Moses and Abraham. Why are we making all this fuss about Jesus? Let’s just accept him as our Lord and go on with the law and the tabernacle, and the temple. Let’s just do what we have always done.” Recall that the Jews were very proud of their heritage. When David comes to Goliath do you remember what he says “Who is this uncircumcised Philistine that he should defy the armies of the living God?” David uses it as an insult. The Jews were very proud of their heritage in promises given to them and to just give it up over Jesus seemed like a hard task to do. In those times a daily prayer of a Jewish man was “Thank God I am not a gentile.” That was a daily prayer. The book of Hebrews emphatically says “No, that’s is not how this all works.” It is reminiscent of the conversation Jesus has with Nicodemus where Jesus says he will need to be born again with the spirit and Nicodemus says “How can someone be born when they are old?” and Jesus says “You are Israel’s teacher,” said Jesus, “and do you not understand these things?” This tone is again struck in Hebrews chapter 5 “We have much to say about this, but it is hard to explain because you are slow to learn.” God’s plan from creation was in Jesus and they Hebrews need to know that Jesus, not the old testament promises were the key piece of God’s plan. So the book proceeds to teach us that Jesus is superior to angles (chapter 1), greater than Moses (chapter 3), he is our high priest (chapter 5) who proclaims a better promise of salvation than that to Abraham and Moses. His promise is eternal and the new tabernacle of God is open to all. Incidentally if you read back to Acts 7, this fact was what caused the Jewish leaders to kill him. In contrast to the old way of the Jews we don’t need constant sacrifices because Jesus Christ is the sacrifice once and for all. God has done all the work for us in our salvation. He has presented Jesus to mankind and then Jesus has presented himself back to God as a sacrifice for all our sins. We are called to work out our salvation by our faith in him. In fact, this faith in Jesus is a necessary component for us to draw near to God. Chapter 10 Verse 22 “Let us draw near to God with a sincere heart in full assurance of faith.” Hebrews 10:39 is even more blunt “Those who believe are saved.” But the following 3 questions remain:  What is faith? Why do we need it? And what does it look like? That is what chapter 11 is all about.
	Faith is defined quite clearly in Hebrews 11 “Faith is being sure of what you hope for a certain of what you do not see.” Since we know now what faith is, let’s understand what faith is not. First of all, faith is not blind. This idea that faith is some kind of blind leap into the dark. The bible never mentions the phrase “leap of faith”. This idea can be traced to Kierkegaard and his context is as important as it is confusing. But his idea never was that in order to have faith we needed to blindly accept God and just hope that everything would be ok. In fact Kierkegaard’s idea was twisted by rationalists into something disturbing. And then following that it was co-oped by Christians who had not read their bibles. Rather than being a jump in the dark Jesus is a lamp unto our path and a light unto our feet. Those walking in darkness have not jumped and caught a ledge, but rather have seen a great light. Jesus doesn’t say I am in a dark room, please jump and catch me. Not at all, Jesus says clearly that he is the light of the world. Pope Francis says this “There is an urgent need, then, to see once again that faith is a light, for once the flame of faith dies out, all other lights begin to dim. The light of faith is unique, since it is capable of illuminating every aspect of human existence.” It is easy to read Hebrews 11 and kind of gloss over the definition of faith. Look once again at the verse and ask yourself this question: how does one become certain of what they do not see? They shine a light on what they need to see. Faith then, is not blind but rather trusting. Abraham does not leave his country on a whim, but because he trusts God. The second thing that faith is not, is that it is not some kind of mental affirmation. Having faith in Jesus means more than saying “I believe God exists and Jesus is his son.” The reason for this is obvious, because Jesus commands us to have faith. You cannot command someone to believe you. If a judge brought me before trial and said “I want you to believe that the sky is orange or I will send you to prison.” I would have no choice. Belief is not a command. If you want further proof then I encourage you to open to Mark 11:22 where Jesus bluntly says "Have faith in God.” You cannot command someone to feel a certain way. Love is the same way. Since it is a command, it cannot merely be an emotion. It has to be something greater, and what it is an optimism for new life, new creation, and rebirth. A critical aspect of faith that makes is different from mere belief is that it looks forward. Our definition says “sure of what you hope for”. Hope looks to the kingdom coming. We see this in Hebrews 11 more explicitly “Instead, they were longing for a better country—a heavenly one. Therefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared a city for them.” Cs Lewis puts it this way- “If we find ourselves with a desire that nothing in this world can satisfy, the most probable explanation is that we were made for another world.” So faith here carries with it an idea of patience and endurance. We are all waiting for God, whether he comes like a thief in the night or if we depart this world. And in full view of this I find Abraham then to be such a surprising man of faith. He looked forward to the Kingdom in harrowing situations. His faith is said to be strong because his belief held with it the hope of God’s promise. This brings us to an application, see Abraham’s faith was not truly amazing because he believed God, but because he held hope in him even when, by all human standards he should not have. This has always been true and always will be. This foolishness of the faith and the absurdity of obedience is the summarized by Paul in his letter to the Corinthians “For the preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness”. We see that God has used to weak things of this world to shame the strong. Abraham who is a frail old man has this hope that in trusting the God he can trek across the desert with an old woman to make his home in a foreign place. It had to be totally alien. When I went to the Philippines I could at least do a google search of the people and places I could visit. There was no trip advisor.com for Abraham. And after he got to this new land, after his nephew took his best land- Abraham did not despair when God said “Number the stars- so shall your offspring be.” Abraham had this hope that our world cannot understand. After this God said “Take your son, your only son Isaac, whom you love, and go to the land of Moriah, and offer him there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains of which I shall tell you.” The hope in God that Abraham had allowed him to without hesitation obey. 
	The practical application is this. That in our day to day life we are often confronted with circumstances that seem cruel, outrageous, or simply unfair. And through these trials we need not despair because we have hope- this treasure- in God that if we is for us nobody can be against us. Despair is a rejection of this hope. This was actually a main point of Kierkegaard, the guy I mentioned earlier.  “Life can only be understood backwards; but it must be lived forwards.” Faith as we know looks forward. The second application is one of obedience. It is very easy when reading a story about Abraham to ask “Why does this matter. God is never going to show up and ask me to travel across the world.” I remember feeling this way when I read the story of Gideon. I as far as I know will never be waging war, and I find it unlikely that God will send me to war. We must also resist the urge to apply stories as commands. I see no logical connection why I should wage war because Gideon did, or why I should leave my home because Abraham did, or why I should marry someone I have never met like Isaac did. The reason we don’t need to make new commands is because there are already a lot of them in the Bible, that if we are honest with ourselves we will admit we don’t follow. And those commands, just like God’s command to Abraham will only become within reach through faith and hope in our Lord Jesus Christ. Think of the last time you lied. We are commanded not to lie, not to tell half-truths, or ‘spin’ the truth yet all of us do it probably at least once a day. We all probably have very good excuses for those lies. But when read Abraham’s story we find no excuse. Even when Abraham later disobeys God and leaves the promise land we find no excuse from his lips when he eventually relents and goes back to the Promised Land. We are commanded so many things. Jesus commands us to “to be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.” He commands us to “love your enemies”. You see these commands are just as difficult if not more difficult than what was asked of Abraham, and yet we don’t see him complaining. He looks to God and obeys. To summarize everything so far: faith enables us to trust Jesus and faith enables us to obey God. This is why we must have faith to come to the person of Jesus and to be saved through his redemptive work. This is why the Jewish Christians were wrong in their interpretation. They couldn’t just affirm that Jesus was Lord. They had to trust Jesus and put their hope in him alone. Not in the law or the promises of the old law. We need to have as much if not more faith in Jesus than Abraham had in his mission to the Promised Land. Remember this, the same faith that Abraham has is the same faith you can have. Abraham as far as men went was unremarkable. We might even say he was remarkable in his unremarkableness. He was an old man with no heirs who lived in a tent. The bible does not even tell us why he was called.  There was “nothing in his appearance that we should desire him.” And yet God calls this unremarkable man, and his faith and conviction empower him to great things. This is the same power and conviction that you and I can have. Don’t believe for a moment that because Abraham is an ancient patriarch that we could never come close to his faith. “Faith is what the ancients were commended for.” It is not their antiquity for which they are praised. We can have faith like Abraham; we can have more faith than Abraham because we have God himself in the Holy Spirit. Because our high priest is greater, he is eternal. Our tabernacle is open. I am convinced that the same power of the saints and all the people in chapter 11 of Hebrews; I am convinced that the same spirit that came to Stephan as he was being stoned for proclaiming truth; the same spirit of God that descended onto Jesus is ours through faith in his son and a hope that ultimately leads us from despair of this life into the expectation of the country that will truly be our own. A country in which God reigns every day in we worship in celebration of the one true King.

